WIP adds an architecture section (#14)
innabox/docs: architecture/README.md

# Architecture

> The Open Sovereign AI Cloud solution gives cloud providers a complete platform

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Open Sovereign AI Cloud (OSAC) solution gives cloud providers a complete platform
```

to offer self-service provisioning of compute infrastructure, including VMs and
OpenShift clusters, integrated with the cloud provider’s existing infrastructure
components. It features a fulfillment workflow that is powerful enough to handle
complex cluster deployment while also being flexible enough to accommodate
future expansion into other types of deployments.

> 

Author: In the `## Fulfillment` section, I expanded the descriptions for each of the three major components just now. I included privilege separation and other factors. It would be good to have you review that section in particular and see what else you might add or change.

## Templates

Self-service provisioning in OSAC is built around a concept of Templates.

> Whether an end user wants to provision a VM, a cluster, or something else,

Reviewer 2: Just a note that I don't think we're planning on using templates for bare metal fulfillment; I don't know if that's important enough to call out as a special case?

Reviewer 3: I don't really think so; really depends what the definition of a template is; if its an ansible role... and there where alternatives, why wouldn't it apply?

Reviewer 2: Because there's other implications to being a template beyond just being an ansible role; there's a degree of customizability where a service provider can create their own templates associated with their own custom ansible roles. As far as I'm aware, we're not planning to have that level of flexibility for bare metal fulfillment.

Author: Let's discuss this more. If we're not going to use templates for bare metal, we should probably write down why.

Reviewer 3: I think this has now changed, as per conversation friday; i.e., we are getting rid of bare metal fullfillment, and having VDC fullfillment; were we create a virtual data center that can include virtual or physical machines connected on networks.  In that case, there are certainly templates involved; actually hierarchical ones.

they'll be presented with a selection of templates from which to choose. Upon
selecting a template, they'll provide the required input, and then the system

> will proceed with a provisioning workflow.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
will proceed with a workflow to allocate the resources (e.g., computers, VMs, networks), connect those resources together, and install the required software on them.
```

> The CSP can define their own templates, including:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Cloud Service Provider (CSP) can define their own templates, including:
```

> * what input each template requires
> * what infrastructure it provisions
> * how it provisions that infrastructure

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* What input each template requires
* What infrastructure it provisions
* How it provisions that infrastructure
```

Ansible makes that possible, because Ansible
[Roles](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/playbook_guide/playbooks_reuse_roles.html)
can be used as Templates. Metadata such as [argument
validation](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/playbook_guide/playbooks_reuse_roles.html#role-argument-validation)
describes how to use a template, while the contents of the Role itself codify

> the implementation of provisioning.

Reviewer: The phrasing "...because Ansible Roles can be used as Templates..." seems a bit weak: it suggests that maybe *other* things can be used Templates, too. I think we should make this more explicit: "A Template is an Ansible Role ...".

Provisioning any kind of compute infrastructure can involve many different systems, such as:

* DNS
* network fabric
* hardware inventory

> * hardware management

Reviewer: What is "hardware management" vs "hardware inventory"?

> * network fabric
> * hardware inventory
> * hardware management
> * virtualization platform
> * application deployment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Network fabric
* Hardware inventory
* Hardware management
* Virtualization platform
* Application deployment
```

Ansible's huge ecosystem of content can already interact with and automate the
vast majority of systems that would be used by a cloud provider. By utilizing

> ansible for defining the template and the details of how infrastructure gets

Reviewer 4: Ansible should be capitalized

provisioned, each cloud provider gets the opportunity to customize templates to
use their chosen infrastructure systems.

## Management Clusters

A Management Cluster is an OpenShift cluster that includes a specific set of
management tooling and that has access to a pool of provisionable compute
resources.

Each Management Cluster includes all of the resources and tooling that is
necessary to provision and sustain the infrastructure requested by end users. A
single Management Cluster may be treated as a failure domain or availability
zone.

Management clusters include the following software:

> * **Red Hat Advanced Cluster Management**: provision and manage clusters, especially using Hosted Control Planes.
> * **OpenShift Virtualization**: provision and manage VMs.
> * **Ansible Automation Platform**: Event Driven Ansible (EDA) to execute provisioning and management workflows.

Reviewer: We should make product mentions links to an appropriate product page.

```suggestion
* [Red Hat Advanced Cluster Management](https://www.redhat.com/en/technologies/management/advanced-cluster-management): provision and manage clusters, especially using Hosted Control Planes.
* [OpenShift Virtualization](https://www.redhat.com/en/technologies/cloud-computing/openshift/virtualization): provision and manage VMs.
* [Ansible Automation Platform](https://www.redhat.com/en/technologies/management/ansible): Event Driven Ansible (EDA) to execute provisioning and management workflows.
```

## Fulfillment

The Fulfillment Service provides a single API that enables a CSP to access the

> wide range of capabilities needed to provision infrastructure on-demand. It does

Author: Before we say that the fulfillment service is going to provision more cloud services, we should name specific services and talk at least at a high level about how they would be implemented.

> wide range of capabilities needed to provision infrastructure on-demand. It does

Reviewer 3: backward reference to the introduction that talks about the services?

> so by providing a gRPC-based API that allows end-users to create fulfillment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
so by providing a gRPC- and/or REST-based API that allows end-users to create fulfillment
```

requests. Upon receiving a request,it then conveys that request to a Management
Cluster where that request can be fulfilled by a set of k8s controllers.

The design of the Fulfillment Service can be understood through three major
components: the core Fulfillment Service; the CloudKit Controller; and Ansible
Automation Platform (AAP). The CloudKit Controller and AAP both run on a
management cluster.

> **Fulfillment Service**: Receives and tracks “orders” for cloud resources, such as the clusters created by Bare Metal Fulfillment and Cluster Fulfillment. Each order is placed onto a management cluster. The fulfillment service includes an API that can be used through REST or gRPC. The Fulfillment CLI integrates with this API; service providers may also integrate their own UIs with this API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Fulfillment Service**: Receives and tracks requests for cloud resources, such as the clusters created by Bare Metal Fulfillment and Cluster Fulfillment. Each request is scheduled onto a management cluster. The fulfillment service includes an API that can be used through REST or gRPC. The Fulfillment CLI integrates with this API; service providers may also integrate their own UIs with this API.
```

> **Cloudkit Controller**: A Kubernetes operator running on each management cluster that watches for orders and then ensures they get fulfilled by using a combination of direct automation and delegation to Event Driven Ansible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Cloudkit Controller**: A Kubernetes operator running on each management cluster that watches for requests and then ensures they get fulfilled by using a combination of direct automation and delegation to Event Driven Ansible.
```

**Ansible Automation Platform (AAP)**: Executes the majority of provisioning steps by running the associated Templates.

The general workflow for fulfillment is as follows:

* First, the cloud provider makes a request for resources through the API, on behalf of a tenant user, having received that request through their own user interface. Alternatively the cloud provider might expose the fulfillment API directly to end users.

> * The fulfillment service selects a management cluster and then places the order there with the Kubernetes CloudKit operator using Kubernetes APIs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The fulfillment service selects a management cluster and then places the request there with the Kubernetes CloudKit operator using Kubernetes APIs.
```

> * The fulfillment service selects a management cluster and then places the order there with the Kubernetes CloudKit operator using Kubernetes APIs.

Reviewer 3: A whole bunch of conversations have had recently suggest that many of the providers will be willing to just expose our API, why don't we just say up front that the API can be used by either tenant, or by a provider, and then everywhere just say tenant

> * The fulfillment service selects a management cluster and then places the order there with the Kubernetes CloudKit operator using Kubernetes APIs.

Author: @memalhot done.
@okrieg I don't disagree, but are there other specific places we need to change? Perhaps we can try to describe in one place where the incoming requests come from, and otherwise just focus on talking about how those requests are handled.

* The CloudKit operator then performs automated setup and triggers the third component: Ansible playbooks via Event-Driven Ansible (EDA). It then reports status back to the Fulfillment Service.
* Once the EDA webhook is triggered, AAP runs to manage the deployment. The exact automation varies and can be customized by each cloud provider’s needs.

The Fulfillment Service is intentionally modeled on the Kubernetes pattern:

> providers submit an Order that declares the desired state, and the CloudKit

Reviewer: ```suggestion
providers submit a request that declares the desired state, and the CloudKit
```

operator reconciles the cluster to match that desired state. To put it simply, the

> fulfillment API creates the order, and the Cloudkit Operator reconciles the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
fulfillment API creates the request, and the Cloudkit Operator reconciles the
```

order. This gives the service a flexible way to achieve reconciliation that
doesn’t limit us to a specific set of APIs or tools. Because this offers a wider
application, further configuration to fit the needs of service providers is done
through Ansible Automation Platform (AAP).

The flexibility of this architecture means that, broadly speaking, there are
only two things that must happen when implementing a fulfillment workflow.

> 1. Define an order object that has all the attributes a user needs to specify their desired outcome. For cluster fulfillment, that's simply a template and template parameters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Define an request object that has all the attributes a user needs to specify their desired outcome. For cluster fulfillment, that's simply a template and template parameters.
```

> 2. Create the playbooks that reconcile the order. For cluster fulfillment, those playbooks call the OpenShift provisioning APIs, as well as the beginnings of bare metal/L2/L3 workflows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Create the playbooks that reconcile the request. For cluster fulfillment, those playbooks call the OpenShift provisioning APIs, as well as our initial implementation of bare metal/L2/L3 workflows.
```

Details of specific fulfillment types are specified in the following sections.

* [Cluster Fulfillment](cluster-fulfillment.md)
* [Bare Metal Server Fulfillment](bm-server-fulfillment.md)
* [VM Fulfillment](vm-fulfillment.md)

### Integration Patterns

In many cases, a CSP will use its own APIs and services to interact with
end-users, and then the CSP's systems will call the Fulfillment Service in
response to end-user actions. In those scenarios, the end-user never interacts
directly with the Fulfillment Service.

> 

Reviewer: Is it worth calling out that we expect this to be the most common model of interacting with the solution?

Optionally, a CSP can expose the Fulfillment Service directly to its end-users.

Either way, the Fulfillment Service has multitenancy built into its data and
operational models, and it depends on specific information in each API request

> to identify the user and tenant.

Reviewer 5: FYI: @larsks

### User Interfaces

OSAC includes [a command-line
utility](https://github.com/innabox/fulfillment-cli) that can be used to
interact with the API.

OSAC may also include a web UI that can be used for demos or proofs of concept.
At some point it might make sense to include a production-ready web UI that could
be used directly by CSPs, but that would require additional scope of use cases

> that go beyond the initial focus of OSAC.

Author: Given that we already have a recorded demo using a web UI, I think it's going to come up as a question as to what our intent is. It could be useful to have an answer here to point to. I also think it's fairly inevitable that we'll need to have some kind of demo UI to show how this works.

request is scheduled onto a Management Cluster. The Fulfillment Service includes
an API that can be used through REST or gRPC.

The Fulfillment Service exists as an API layer for several reasons:

* Privilege Separation is achieved because the service that external entities interact with does not have the ability to directly affect infrastructure.
* Multi-tenancy that is suitable for cloud use cases can only be achieved by adding a layer of privilege abstraction on top of the Kubernetes APIs that implement OSAC's capabilities.
* While we could directly expose a k8s API with similar capabilities, the k8s API itself is generally understood to not be suitable for putting on the internet or in front of unknown and untrusted clients.
* Additionally, Namespace-based RBAC in k8s is not sufficient for the level of tenant separation required.
* Multiple Management Clusters may exist in a deployment as discussed above, and this layer enables topology awareness and the ability to schedule requests onto different Management Clusters as appropriate.

The Fulfillment CLI integrates with this API; service providers may also
integrate their own UIs with this API.

> ### Cloudkit Controller

Reviewer: Should we replace "cloudkit" with "O-SAC" throughout this document?

Reviewer 4: i feel like that would be clearer!

Author: done
